We've done a fantastic job. Well, thank
you. It's just gorgeous. Oh, maybe I'll
look over here and here's another. Yes,
exactly. That's the same kind. That's an
agave. We thought they were Agave
americana, but I had an olive expert out
here looking, and he thinks they're Agave
farrox. And what is the one that was
completely, it's being so carefully held
up? That's my very favorite plant. It's
this one right here, the one that looks
kind of like an upside-down carrot. That's
called a boujum tree. It's named after the
Lewis Carroll poem. Tell me the poem. The
Hunting of the Snark. I don't know. The
boujum. The boujum. Is in there. Okay. So
that's what it's named after. We moved
that here. Remember I was showing you
which ones were original? That's one of
the larger ones we moved. And we actually
got A to Z tree movers in Mountain View to
donate their time, and they went all the
way down to Greenfield, which is south of
Salinas, with a crane. So that's not the
one, but you knew one was there. There was
someone who was selling his house who had
landscaped his entire property in plants
like this, and it was a condition of
escrow that he get rid of them.
That's the normal way it looks? It's quite
lush. They grow on cliffs in Baja, so
usually they look more scraggly and less
branchy. This is a very, very happy
specimen of one. They bloom. They bloom in
the summer. They put out little yellow
flowers at the top. You can sort of see
the remains of the flower stalks. And
since they're Baja native, you know,
they're used to very little water, and
they don't take the combination of cold
and wet. This is one of our really
borderline plants. So we dug a couple feet
down underneath it, amended it with drain
gravel, and then planted it in a raised
bed and built the retaining wall around
it. And we're just hoping that we can keep
it going. And if we get, you know, if this
does turn out to be a really cold wet
winter, that's one of the ones. There's a
couple of quite spectacular plants that we
took that were borderline just because
they would have been bulldozed and gone.
So in choosing these these plants, just so
I can get it clear in my mind. You had the
plan, and so you know the kind of plants
that were here, but you did not try to go
and exactly replace every plant that you
saw. Right, that's an excellent question,
because if you looked at what was here in
the mid-1990s, like I said, there were
like five different kinds and like five
million of each of those. Originally,
there were hundreds of different kinds of
plants and they didn't survive. Now, the
garden had been really neglected since
probably around World War II, too. But
even so, you know, it just, it was
designed as a high maintenance Victorian
garden. And that was not sort of what it
can be now. And there's not the funds to
go out and buy plants. So we take what
we're given, or we took what we're given
for the most part, because we're kind of
full up now. But what they did, before I
came on, they hired a landscape architect
named Nancy Hardesty. Okay. And she came
up with a plan, what she called this ABCD
plan. And it's, So what we do is we
classify plants by type and A plants are
tall focal point plants and each bed gets
one or two of those kind of depending on
the size. So that boujum tree is an A
plant and the palm tree is an A plant. And
then there's B plants which are
substantial plants and large but more
broad. So like when these prickly pear and
the cholla grow up those will be B plants.
And then C plants are are big, you know,
sort of normal-sized plants, like, you
know, kind of that one person can move
around, and that those will, these would
be C plants, and then D plants are ground
cover. And so what every bed is supposed
to have is this pyramidal planting scheme
with an A plant in the middle, B plants
around it, C plants at the edges, and then
D plants doing ground cover in between.
And that's not entirely similar to what
was there. They had hundreds of saguaros
in this original garden. If you look, you
can see just in here all of these. I see.
And there's no, I mean, those are
protected species. There's no way we could
get hundreds of saguaros, and they didn't
survive. So this is the way that we can
get sort of a formal look with a diversity
of plant material to have that sort of
scheme that all the beds have a sort of
uniformity. So, and then in addition to
that, they're trying to put some botanical
usefulness into the garden. So we have a
division into eastern and western
hemispheres. So all plants native to the
western hemisphere, so the Americas
basically, are on this half of the garden,
and all plants native to Asia and Africa
and Europe are on that side of the garden.
Although we did not move any original
plants that were there. So Joshua plants
are native, Joshua trees and yuccas and
things like that are native to the
southwest, so there are yucca trees down
there, and that big prickly pear is an
original, so it didn't get moved. But of
all the new plants that we've put in, so
all the aloes are at that end of the
garden. Oh yeah, that's what's blooming
now, they're looking beautiful. This looks
unique. That's the jumping… Are the
barrels or the jumping cholla? No. And
this one? The one staked up right here?
Yeah. Yeah, that's a jumping cholla.
That's original. I mean, this particular
plant was originally in the garden. This
one is not a descendant of what was here.
The one on the other end, though, is just
a cutting that we took of a plant that had
survived. Do you have any sagurus here?
Yes, we do. Unfortunately, they are under
wraps. Under Rats, yeah. There was a
wonderful person who lived on one of those
hills in Cupertino, a big estate, and they
were selling it and moving to the city to
be closer to their children. The new
owners didn't want the saguaros. They
wanted a basketball court. So now how do
you find these places? They find me. It's
amazing. Yeah. So what would you like that
you don't have that you would love for
someone to call and say? I would love more
saguaros. I would love ground cover at
this point. It's kind of hard to say right
now it depends a lot on the winter.
There's things if we lose I would
definitely like to replace. I do have a
plant list and they're trying to get it up
on the grounds department website of what
we could use. So people just call the
university and say I have this cactus?
Yeah, or people find me. Actually a lot of
our volunteers, the San Francisco
Succulent and Cactus Society was mentioned
in the article and they committed to this
volunteer project to Herb Fong like long
before I was hired, long before any of
this started because because they didn't
want to start the project and then not
have any volunteers and have it kind of
flail. So that's a huge network right
there. So a lot of people who don't know
anything about the garden, but they have a
yard full of plants, they have small
trees. They don't want to kill the plants,
but they don't want to have the plants
anymore, so they call the succulent
societies, and all the succulent societies
pretty much know me now. Well, you have an
article in the State of Greenland. I
talked to Kevin Koltz on my mom's here
list. If you'd like to lobby Kevin Koltz
and put an article in, that would be
great. I think anybody who has a standard
connection would love it. What I really
want, actually what I would really like,
there are definitely plans I would like
people out of the blue to give me, but
what I would really like is people to give
me pictures of the garden from the middle
of this century on. Because I have,
like... I think it's that they don't have
a lot of art in it, because they have many
other, you know, the rest of it. I mean,
even if they just put a note about having
a baby. So if you do know people, feel
free to drop it. Darn. Feel free to drop
it. Just give them the evidence that you
know. Yeah. Yeah. Well, my other problem
is, I went to her farm, my Boston grounds,
and I'm like, you know, okay, I can work
tonight. I can get people to do all that.
But I'm trying to think about cacti. I
know like California native plants, like
heirloom vegetables. I was like, that's
okay. It's okay. Very quickly, very, very,
very quickly.
Thank you for coming!
Well, it's really our volunteers.
Thanks for coming by. Bye.
I was going to do an interview, but you
told me everything I needed to know. Oh,
come on. Surely you can think of something
else to ask. People find you. Don't look.
Yeah. Look over here. Look at the plant.
Yeah. This is truly a work of love on your
part, right? Absolutely. I mean, this
garden is a very special place. And all of
the volunteers who put so much of their
effort into it, I mean, it's just a
wonderful, wonderful effort. And how much
time a week do you put into this place?
I'm employed in the Grants Department 20
hours a week, so, you know, occasionally
there's a few extra hours here and there.
But pretty much it's a half-time
commitment, and then I have my other half
-time job in archives. So I have more than
enough to keep me busy. Okay, what makes
this place so special? Well, there's not
very many 19th century gardens left on the
peninsula to begin with. And then this
garden itself is one of the earliest
experiments with growing these kind of
plants, cacti and succulents outdoors not
under glass that was one of the great
innovations that the landscape architect
who designed this garden Rudolph Ulrich
made so in a certain way you can think of
it as like the very very earliest
beginnings of xerophytic gardening in
California that you know now we have all
these drought tolerant gardens and this is
one of the places it all started. Wow.
Pretty cool. It is pretty cool and these
plants do they have Do they have
personalities for you? Not so much for me,
except the prickly pears always seem to be
trying to jump me and get a couple of
spines in me. But I know a lot of my
volunteers have particular affinities with
particular kinds of plants, and they're
always, oh yes, she's happy today, oh he
doesn't look too good. So I think they do
have personalities. You were talking a
little bit before about the levels,
there's four levels. Tell me a little bit
about that. Okay, Nancy Hardesty, the
landscape architect who helped come up
with this restoration schema, it's a way
that we can use donated plants and take
what plant materials are given to us and
yet maintain some sort of visual
uniformity and Victorian formalism in the
garden. This was originally a formal
garden. It's not, you know, a naturalistic
run wild kind of garden, so there's a lot
of symmetry, a lot of balance. So what she
did was create four general categories of
plants. There's A-type plants, which are
really tall, big, massive plants when
they're mature. They're the focal point of
every bed, and there's 50-some-odd beds in
the garden. So every bed, depending on
size, should have one or two plants. And
an example of that would be this palm tree
or this Yucca Follifera here. They're just
commanding plants. And then there's B-type
plants, which are also large plants, but
they're bulkier and not as tall. So those
would ring the outside of the A-type
plants. And then there's C-type plants,
which are, you know, a couple feet in
diameter maximum. maximum. Those go
outside the bee plants. And then D-type
plants are ground cover and those go
around the edges of all the beds. So that
allows us to have a pyramidal planting
plan for every bed, but it doesn't
constrain us with the type of plants
because we are so dependent on donated
plants. So it's worked really well. Tell
me your name and spell it so I don't waltz
it up. It's Christy. It's Christy Smith, C
-H-R-I-S-T-Y, and the last name is Smith,
S-M-I-T-H. And give me a title. volunteer
coordinator Stanford Arizona Garden
Project great now the palm trees in a
plant right okay that's an a plant okay
give me a B plant oh and these are sea
plants oh good I love them oh they're
beautiful and where's the D plant
Professor Dudley who was a botanist here
in the 20s and 20s. Really? Yep. So I'm
working on a little Dudley Memorial
Garden. Now what I'd like to do... Do you
want to see the agave? Yeah, I don't want
to... The aloe polyphyllo, that's the one
you probably want to still. Yeah, that's
the hot one. And you're going to have to
climb in the plants to see it. That's
right. I'm going to let you walk ahead of
me. Alright, I'll put the doggy here.
That's okay. Sit. Sit. Stay.
And just talk to me about this. Alright,
this is an aloe polyphylla. It's called a
spiral aloe. They've only come into
cultivation recently. As you can see, it's
very geometric. And this one spirals to
the right and they come spiraling both
ways. There's one that spiraled to the
left as well. And I would dearly love to
get another one that spirals the other way
for the garden. Tell me a little bit about
this plant. This particular one? It's an
aloe polyphylla. It's a spiral aloe. They
come spiraled both ways. This is a right
spiraled one, but there are left spiraled
ones as well, which I would love to get
another one for the garden. And they've
only fairly recently been brought into
cultivation. They're fascinating to look
at because they are so geometric in their
form. And once they get established, you
know, this will maybe triple in size and
then it makes offsets. So it'll actually,
the spiral will split. It's kind of like
watching a cell divide and there will
become two spirals and out of it when it
gets, you know, about that size. This is
the hot plant. This is one everybody wants
to see, right? Well, a lot of people want
to see it. They're not that common yet. So
I think it's just a spectacular plant. No,
it's just still. Yeah. Take a look. You
can see it. Oh. Oh, yeah, that looks
great. I got my little tweezers. I should
be cleaning it out.
Here's a nice red stem. And it's in the
wrong place in the bed. That's okay, we
won't...
And are the swirls new? Um, they've been
in the...
I suppose one other thing to think about
is the original pattern of them although
we've had to dig them out from up to 12
inches of dirt oh hang on a second now you
can talk to me over here oh thank god tell
me about the rocks the rocks are one of
the really interesting historic features
of the garden they're original. I mean
there's not that much that's, you know,
left from when the garden was actually
made, but the bed outline is all original.
The rocks were buried under up to 12
inches of dirt and we've hand excavated
and raised them and preserved the pattern.
So that really is, you know, the plants
may be slightly different than what you
would have seen in the original garden,
but the bed outline and sort of the
quadrilateral symmetry of the garden is
original and as close to the original as
we can make it as we excavate it. This
place has real meaning as part of
Stanford, doesn't it? Yeah. Talk to me
about that. This garden was originally
going to be the backyard for the
Stanford's house that was going to be
where the mausoleum now stands, and it was
built in the early 1880s before they had
started construction on the house and
before little Leland died. And as you
know, construction on the house was put
aside when he passed away and they decided
to found a university. But the garden had
already been made. So it was a garden
designed for a residence. Rudolf Ulrich,
who designed this garden, also designed a
garden at the Hotel Del Monte for
Stanford's business partner, Charles
Crocker. And it's very similar in certain
ways, but it's also more open and more
formal because it was a public garden to
go with a hotel, and this was a private
garden. But yeah, it's a real early piece
of Stanford history. There's not too many
pieces of early Stanford history left that
you can just walk through. Imagine what it
would be like. So I think it is a very
special place. What's the, what's the,
tell me about the upside down carrot. Oh,
that's my very favorite tree. That's a
Bujum tree. It's over there. It's named
after the Lewis Carroll poem by whoever, I
don't know who discovered it, but it's
native to Baja, California, and obviously
they were a Lewis Carroll fan. I think I
really like it because in addition to it
looking beautiful and unique, it's the
first large plant that I helped move into
the garden. I didn't really know you could
move plants that big and have them
survive. and the tree crew guys that
helped me move it didn't know that either
because they move oak trees they don't
move succulent trunked cacti so so we had
to prune back all the branches we wadded
up newspaper and stuffed them all between
the branches then we wrapped it in in old
sheets and then we build a framework of
two by fours around it before we let the
crane lift it up and then the guys
excavated the root ball and bald and
burlap tit and we brought it here and put
it into place with a crane and it grew it
was so exciting so I'm very very attached
to that particular plant. It's like a
child for you. Yeah, yeah. Well, yeah
probably. And who is this person? Who's
this guy? Hey Uzo, can you say hello? This
is my little garden mascot. Yes, she helps
us keep the ground squirrels away. We have
a lot of ground squirrel damage in the
garden. But she comes out and keeps me
company too. Yeah, she's a sweetheart. Hi
Lisa, how you doing? She says Uzo, my name
is Uzo.
Yeah, that's a cute puppy. Cute puppy dog.
She says that she just loves the fact that
I have this job. Oh, I bet she does. Now I
gotta take a picture of the carrot. Yeah.
One of my volunteers is coming down here
with a large format negative camera and
taking pictures of it.
Come here,πάotra
I'm going to go make a couple of...
They're very vicious. Are they? Yes.
Detriment. They're small and they break
off and they're very sharp and you get
them in your skin and you can't see them
to get them out and they can get infected
and painful. What do they call? The little
fuzzy things are called blockets. And so
they look beautiful. They look friendly.
they don't look very spiky at all but
they're bad news. Watch out. If you look
at this one over here this is another kind
of prickly pear and you can see this has
the combination of spines and glochids.
Which one is that? The purple one over
here. Yeah this one only has the glochids.
This one has the combination of both. So
that genus comes with a whole range from
like lots of spines and few glochids to
all glochids and no spines.
But these are more obvious that you
shouldn't touch them. Let's see what that
one's going to do.
That's pretty awesome. Which means that I
get nice clean shots. I'm already consumed
with envy for your camera stuff. I'm
sorry.
And I guess one of the other really
special things about this garden is that
there's almost always something in bloom.
Hang on one second. Start up. Okay. One of
the other really great things about this
garden is that there's always something in
bloom year round. So even now that it's
the middle of January, we've got aloes
blooming, and this giant agave here is
starting to think about blooming. So it's
sending up its big flower spike, and it'll
bloom sometime over the next couple months
and set seed and produce some offsets, and
it will die. But it will leave plenty of
babies behind it. So it's pretty
spectacular to watch the things in bloom,
even in the middle of winter. Now, the
giant...
Now, I'm going to shoot the carrot before
I forget it.
It's a lovely place. If you want ideas on
your scale of flexibility. It's just
wonderful. Yeah, and Nancy earned every
bit that we paid.
Yeah, that big one is really big. Lovely.
Now these rocks are all original, right?
Well, the ones that look really older...
...and Morgan Hill. It's just great.
Do you know anything about cactus? A
little bit. You need to know anything
about cactus? Go ahead. I was just always
wondering, they tend to grow that white
stuff that's on that one. Go ahead.
That's, um... Walk over here. I'm holding
it. Isn't that some poison? No, it's just
a white fluff that they make. And certain
species of cactus have it. It's usually in
the genus Oreosurius and they're called
old man cacti. They just put out, that's
one of the sort of protective things they
have. It gives them a little protection
from hot sun and probably a little frost
protection as well. It's not strychnine?
No, it's not strychnine. Because there was
this, you guys used to have cactuses
stacked around over there waiting for you
to plant it or whatever. Uh huh. And it
was during the summertime and it was
covered with that white stuff. Well
there's other kinds of white stuff.
There's an infestation called like cotton
stain. Cotton stain. Cotton stain. Cotton
stain. Uh huh. Cotton stain. Cotton stain.
Uh huh, interesting. Yeah, yeah. Yeah.
Oh well, you know, you never know what
these stories will do. You might agree
that's what people do in the practice. But
they're just pieces of plant material.
They're not people who talk about anything
about it.
I couldn't say. Goodbye.
Sorry? That's a baby soil. That's what
they look like.
I hear they
grow something like an inch a year.
I'm sorry.
Working away. There's nothing like getting
muddy and dirty in the pursuit of your
job.
They have to be thinned out anyway,
because otherwise they'll just totally
grow over each other and get crowded out.
As much easier to do when the dirt is
soft. Yes
I'm going to go find some more cerns.
Okay.
So this is how you propagate cern cactus,
but hopefully nobody will get ideas and
come in here and start taking things. We
do have occasional problems with that.
The great thing about these is they have
to harden off, so they have to callus over
before you plant them in the ground, so
you can leave them sitting around for a
couple of weeks before you plant them.
Okay, now I'm going to just let you work
and... in.
All right.
Alright, should we go paint some more?